this video is brought to you by our
patrons for as little as a dollar a
month you can gain Early Access to new
videos see behind the scenes content
listen to our Patron exclusive podcast
the patreon and much more for 2023 we're
developing a lot of projects based on
Patron goals including videos about the
Sandman revolutionary girl Lieutenant
Neon Genesis Evangelion and even a
complete queer history series spanning
the time from ancient Mesopotamia to
modern day sign up today at the link in
the description to help us in producing
educational queer content everyone can
watch
hey everyone we're going to do a simple
video this time no big fancy sets or
multiple cameras because I just want to
talk about the now officially Best
Picture Oscar nominated movie everything
everywhere all at once maybe the best
movie of 2022
so let's do a normal video essay for
once and talk about something that's
just so
so good
[Music]
there was never any indication that
everything everywhere all at once was
going to feature a prominent queer
character in fact from promotional
material nobody could really figure out
what the movie was going to be about at
all this movie dropped just as the
Multiverse hype was hitting its cusp
bull Marvel and DC had been hyping their
prospective upcoming Multiverse movies
throughout 2020 and 2021 Multiverse of
Madness and Flashpoint had been
announced since forever ago even by then
and the Loki series also poked at this
idea other media like content on the CW
had toyed with this for a while there
was enough Multiverse Buzz that critics
leading up to everything everywhere's
release were hailing it as the best
Multiverse movie probably a good thing
that it dropped sooner rather than later
because Multiverse of Madness had less
to do with multiverses and more to do
with demonizing women who have undergone
debilitating trauma made by men who
openly admitted to having no familiarity
with the preceding media and while
claiming to want to recreate the source
material clearly missed the point of
said Source material and Flashpoint is
yeah without knowing too much about the
plot the movie was promoted on martial
arts set pieces Whimsical Vibes and
Michelle yo in general but what we got
was so much more we're gonna get into
spoilers here but if you do press on
without having seen the movie it's
definitely worth a watch afterwards
because there's so much more that I just
cannot get into here everything
everywhere all at once is about Evelyn
Quan Wang a Chinese immigrant who owns a
laundromat in America who left China
with her soon to be fiance because her
parents didn't approve of the
relationship Evelyn is stressed
overwhelmed and trying to take
everything on her shoulders on top of
her father gong gong moving into their
tiny apartment above the laundromat
Evelyn is struggling to connect with her
daughter Joy Joy is an out lesbian who
is begging her mother to acknowledge her
girlfriend to gong gong and in general
Evelyn deflects these requests claiming
that gong gong is very old-fashioned and
that she is just too busy to deal with
the Fallout though it is implied that
Evelyn isn't entirely comfortable with
it herself and brushes this off as a
quirk not seeing the emotional toll that
it's taking on Joy Evelyn frequently
gets lost in thoughts and Daydreams
about what her life could have been if
only she had made certain decisions
differently namely if she hadn't left
China to be with her present husband
Waymond who by the way has filed for
divorce she just doesn't know it yet
like most people who would rather
disassociate from the reality of their
life Evelyn likes to dip her toes into
different hobbies and she uses the
laundromat to write off these expenses
as side businesses which does not go
over well with their caseworker from the
IRS Deidra who gives them a few hours
for a second chance to clear up the
confusion on their tax returns though
Evelyn is certain it won't make any
difference she is however confronted by
her husband who takes on a strange
personality shift Waymond claims that he
is now Alpha Waymond from the alpha
verse in his home Universe Evelyn is a
brilliant scientist who developed verse
jumping a technology that can allow a
person to access alternate versions of
themselves in different universes
each time someone makes a decision an
alternate universe branches off to
accommodate all outcomes of said
decision this verse jumping allows
someone to gain access to skills and
talents that they had gained in other
universes he warns Evelyn that a
powerful verse jumper is after her name
jobu tapaki after making her first verse
jump Evelyn is murdered by jobu only to
learn that it is her daughter
Joy
in the alpha verse Evelyn has worked
with joy to test verse jumping she
pushed Joy beyond the safety limits and
split Joy's Consciousness apart
Joy now exists in all possible universes
at once flipping between different
versions of herself and swapping between
different elements of different
universes with this power she seeks to
conquer all universes for reasons yet
unknown after being exposed to a large
number of her own Universal variants
Evelyn's father is revealed to be the
leader of the resistance against joy as
Evelyn fights against both jobu tupaki
and also gong's forces her mind
splinters exposing her to a wide range
of alternate realities that she inhabits
beginning to develop the same abilities
as jobu she can draw from a multitude of
different versions of herself even in
universes not accessible to verse
jumping technology
she's off the damn map with each one she
experiences she begins to see every
other universe as better than the one
she currently inhabits she's a movie
star in the Kung Fu Evelyn Universe
she's a renowned singer in the stabs
eyes out accidentally Universe she's a
spinning sign woman and one Universe
which
maybe not a step up but she's got moves
by accident she stumbles upon the hot
dog finger Universe where she's a
lesbian of course I mean if you've got
hot dog fingers why not and she's a
Master Chef in the rakakuna universe and
there are also variations of each of
these through her confrontations with
jobu across the variations of the
Multiverse it becomes clear that jobu
doesn't want to kill her mother while
she seems ambivalent toward killing
anyone else keep in mind jobu and or joy
is a being who exists in all versions of
herself simultaneously she sees no point
in batting an eye over anything she does
because everyone she kills in one
universe is still alive in another for
all their differences Joy can think of
no other person who is as disappointed
with their life as her mother and while
Joy was broken-hearted that her own
mother wouldn't stand up for her jobu is
only annoyed
I'm so sorry
you're still hung up on the fact that I
like girls she is annoyed that her
mother has chosen to close off herself
to a single way of thinking specifically
and indicates that her homophobia is a
symptom not the root of Evelyn's
problems when jobu shows Evelyn her
plans for the Multiverse Evelyn tries to
defend her actions saying that she just
doesn't want to upset her father this
late in life this different generation
you don't have to hide behind him
anymore jobu's Grand evil plan is that
she is constructing an everything bagel
with everything on it and she means
everything sesame seeds poppy seeds
airplanes lava lamps Art Deco hope
supernovas Saturday morning cartoons
sadness and upon gazing at her great
work jobu realized that in the context
of everything
nothing
really mattered
it was all just there but there was no
meaning to anything adding more and more
on to the bagel she just realized that
less and less really had any inherent
value she reveals that she was never
seeking out Evelyn to kill her
she was seeking out a version of Evelyn
who could understand Joy is an
emotionally intelligent lady and based
on Stephanie Jesus performance it's
clear to me that she can put her
mother's actions and beliefs in the
context of who her mother is what Evelyn
has dealt with in her life and
especially how Evelyn feels about it but
in another way that just makes Joy even
more bitter she sees how Evelyn is
living her life and how she is doing
nothing to change it if anything had any
value surely Evelyn would put in a
little bit more effort to change and so
this is why Joy feels that maybe a
version of her mother could be made to
understand exactly what this everything
bagel means instead overwhelmed Evelyn
demands to be returned to her normal
life where she's hosting a Chinese New
Year's party at her laundromat she wants
nothing to do with this verse jumping
stuff anymore even if she gets to be an
actress or a Kung Fu Master it's just a
fantasy but joy is there to remind her
that she can never unexperience the
mundanity of knowing just how sad her
life is and all those universes are
actually worse than a fantasy it's
visceral proof that she made the wrong
decisions in her life and that there's
nothing she can do to change her
circumstances in the laundromat Universe
her life is falling apart due to
decisions she cannot unmake might as
well let it happen get over it and just
stop making decisions before she makes
it even worse for herself problem is
Evelyn's mind is still fractured and she
herself is like jobu simultaneously
existing in a myriad of realities she
cannot Escape these confrontations of
what her life is the pressure sends
Evelyn on a nosedive smashing a window
in the laundromat signing the divorce
papers getting smashed drunk and getting
disowned by her father alternate reality
Evelyn's aren't doing much better either
and it isn't until she sees weyman
trying to pull her back from the brink
that she comes around
all her varians begin to clean up their
messes
but Evelyn's mind splinters even further
and she is exposed to the full potential
of everything she could have been
some worse some better some even
animated but in the context of
everything the multitude of infinite
possibilities and identities Evelyn
realizes that not one single action she
does in any one single Universe actually
means anything there is no Ripple of
consequentialism there is no great Peril
to the world if she undertakes one
solitary decision because there are an
infinite range of versions of herself
where the decision was never available
in the first place Evelyn sees that
nothing means anything but instead of
jobu's conclusion Evelyn understands
that this just means she has the freedom
to choose how she acts if nothing means
anything and that means nothing has any
real Cosmic consequences either our
ultimate choice is that we choose the
consequences that matter to us just as
laundromat Evelyn chose to live with the
consequences of leaving her family for
Waymond she begins to see what she got
out of that which was missing from other
universes and Evelyn chooses Joy both
feeling and the person because her Joy
means more to her than anything she
could have in all the other universes
combined
queerness as it manifests in this movie
is not the driving force of the plot
Joy's queerness is a wedge between her
and Evelyn but the wedge was put there
by her mother
the plot frames Evelyn as the flawed
character whose narrative direction is
to overcome her flaws
and like I said homophobia was
symptomatic of her inability to grow and
change simply because she did not
believe it was possible for her to
change the onus of choice was not on Joy
to be straight but for Evelyn to choose
to accept it or not Evelyn herself is
alluded to be bisexual as she is married
to her IRS caseworker in the hot dog
fingers Universe though it is unclear if
this also applies to laundromat Evelyn
perhaps the message here is that we have
the potential to be all things the more
we realize that the more we move toward
love and acceptance of others that our
belief that a choice is finite only ever
locks us into certain ways of thinking
in a movie entirely about choice
queerness is not a part of the
discussion it's not a choice
Joy's queerness factors into this film
only as far as generates conflict
between mother and daughter Joy
sexuality really only factors into the
plot as a straw that breaks the camel's
back even though this is what we see
characters reference any number of
events that strain the relationship
between Evelyn and joy in the past
beyond the textual references to Joy's
listless lack of Direction there is a
reading of this story where the universe
jumping doesn't happen instead it's just
a fantasy concocted by Evelyn or a
metaphor to describe events in Evelyn's
life Alpha Waymond describes Alpha
Evelyn's treatment of joy in the alpha
verse
saw her potential
so he pushed her
Beyond her limit we can extrapolate that
Evelyn in the laundromat Universe did
the same to Joy in her own way as Joy's
mind fractured and merged with every
other version of herself she could not
find a single world where she was living
up to her mother's expectations it makes
sense like many parents who had once
been considered gifted children
themselves they see in their children
everything that they could not be by
proxy of their children they want to see
their own potential realized in
universes where she remained in China
for whatever reason Evelyn has only seen
in prestigious careers as a singer her
father has close at hand and this is the
only Universe where we see him Express
fondness towards her while the
particulars may be different character
beats and personalities remain
consistent Across the Universe alternate
realities do a great deal to foil a
character against themselves bearing in
mind sequences cut between each other
sync up with events figurative actions
in one Universe are literal actions in
another
figurative actions in one Universe are
literal actions in another based on the
dizzying editing flipping between
universes it's difficult to keep track
of which universe is which and which one
is the one with the narrative through
line we ought to be following
The Narrative description of Multiverse
fill in a whole lot of plot holes the
universe where Evelyn assaults diadra
may seem to be the main Universe however
this is the same universe where Joy
manifests or suicide bagel and the
universe we may assume to be the real
one because it's more grounded and
handles the emotional conflict between
joy and Evelyn is actually a universe in
which Joy sent Evelyn to prove a point
this seems to carry on the Divergent
reality from Evelyn not punching Deidra
the universe we end with is not the
universe we began with but is the
universe we end with even a universe we
had seen before based on how the film
clips between universes the entire final
sequence of the movie may be
disconnected from the plot of the others
in fact when it comes to every single
other Universe with the exception of
maybe the hot dog finger lesbian
Universe we do not entirely know how
they resolve
everything is
kind of left dangling narratively we the
audience are shown the emotional Beats
how each alternate universe ties into
character development and others that
have more of a through line thematically
the audience is being informed that what
happens is less important than how these
characters and by extension the audience
handle their interpersonal relations and
self-worth
who someone is matters more than what
someone does
but what's most important is how someone
feels the end of the film may be an
entirely different Universe altogether
one where Evelyn does have her [ __ ]
together and where she does have a
loving relationship with Waymond where
gong gong is a more supportive father
and less of a prick and where she is a
more supportive and accepting mother to
her gay child Becky
however what is not present in the film
though perhaps this is suggested is the
idea the choices absolutely can split
universes apart but they may also be
able to converge realities too
that conflict within the self may lead
to opposing decisions that splinter the
cosmos
but also that if one truly understands
that choices ultimately do not matter
the no choice needs to be made and
universes do not need to branch
finding peace with one's current
existence healing and mending
relationships can also heal the
separation between the universes Joyce
stands on a precipice where she has
learned that in the context of not only
one Cosmos but many objects and events
in reality do not matter
that is if all things matter the same
there is no singular thing that stands
out but she has existed in a family
environment where her feelings don't
matter so why would anything else
keeping in mind that her catalog of
what's on the everything bagel
does not include people Evelyn's
realization as aforementioned was indeed
that nothing mattered but she came to
understand this as a liberating Factor
neither her taxes her father's approval
the laundromat nor the fact that her
husband wants to divorce her mattered
and with all of these external pressures
melted away she saw the root of her
misery
the amount of conflict she was pulling
into her life
because she was over focused on things
that didn't matter
the receipt with the black permanent
markers circling the unspecified dollar
amount just like Joe budapaki's
everything bagel it is a storm of bustle
but the center was empty
the value of the receipt was meaningless
contrasted against wayman's googly eyes
his playful Whimsy his empathy these are
things we often dismiss as meaningless
but at their core
aren't these the things that make life
worth living apparently Everything full
of actual nothing and apparently nothing
full of actual everything the difference
is perspective the inability to
distinguish which fits into which
category is indicative of a society that
has gone spiritually bankrupt and we
have been for some time all the things
we are told are important by society's
latent methods of conditioning us are
the completely wrong things that we
should be focusing on instead where
value lies is the ability to see value
in everyone and everything and that if
putting googly eyes on everything is
necessary to help us pack Bond then
maybe that's necessary
even if it's ridiculous and also perhaps
we should Place more value on
ridiculousness because the more
seriously we take everything
the more the unserious things like
feelings begin to get left behind if the
stress and importance of life is placed
on stuffy things like business success
stability what value do Evelyn's dreams
and hobbies have what do Joy's queer
feelings even matter
when the Family Laundromat is being
audited
foreign
we are reminded that choices diverge
universes
but joy seems to be a lesbian in every
Universe regardless of her or her
mother's choices
this is inescapable
the only choice is how individuals react
to it
and perhaps as a society we need to
begin evaluating what really is or is
not a choice
while some may report that in some
universes Evelyn is queer we must also
remind ourselves that she belongs to one
of the many generations where it was the
social expectation for bisexual people
especially women to force themselves
into heterosexual thinking over the
years many bisexual people have had to
dismiss their same gender attractions
because society never really let them
explore it again the choices and the
reaction to this information
the decision whether to or not accept
this about oneself can cause drastic
shifts in how one lose their life in our
evolving world of queerness one of the
most significant discussions we are
having is how to navigate bigotry at
home at times queer commentators will
sometimes make sweeping generalizations
and statements about the improving
condition of queer acceptance within
their own families and I do this from
time to time myself however even in
America and what Global Society
misguidedly refers to as the West there
is still a widespread pressure for
families to produce heterosexual
children and especially when it comes to
trans teenagers and even early trans
identifying children
there seems to be a whole lot of
questions about how to raise them
there's an overall confusion arising
around the intersection between
sexuality gender and sex even parents
who are otherwise on board with trans
acceptance can be squeamish about the
idea of their child transitioning
cynically I may suggest that in the rush
for widespread acceptance
we never really described what
acceptance looked like and now we as
teenagers young adults and
adults are struggling with how to
redirect our language regarding how we
are treated by those closest to us mere
tolerance it turns out can be quite
toxic
but among people for whom tolerance was
a struggle asking for something more can
feel like asking too much in the film's
opening as much as Evelyn is tolerant of
Joyce sexuality she certainly seems to
resent that she has to be the best she
can offer is passive ignorance why put
in the effort when the choice to give
one's attention to the black hole that
is the family business is right there
this is the trauma of queer tolerance
where we see our family making an effort
but we also see what that effort amounts
to we see all the other things that are
more important than trying to care some
of us see the hierarchy of value and we
see that our feelings and personal
dignity are fairly low on the checklist
some of us begin to see that our family
only really cared about us as an idea
and that maintaining the idea of us is a
whole lot more important than validating
who we actually are queer estrangement
exists for this reason and is quite
common probably taking over from queer
disownment the pendulum has swung the
other way and many of us simply can't
reconcile our relations with family
it's nothing so trivial as parents just
don't understand it is rooted in parents
refusing to change their understanding
and having lived with them for our
entire lives we see how much they are
capable of and we see that their
capability seems to end with changing
their minds about us
when our personhood diverges from the
expectation of what we should be
we really begin to see how much we mean
to these people who have meant the world
to us
and we watch as the language of
Tolerance leads them to believe that
their efforts are enough and we
internalize our emptiness as
in gratitude we can either exist in
their lives feeling guilty for wishing
for more or we can put distance between
us and our family
there's nothing you or anyone can do to
change someone's mind once it's made up
after a while it gets overwhelming
all you can do is control your own
feelings and your own decisions and
sometimes it is easier to cut and run
because others may not have the capacity
to understand the difference between
their choices and who you are and Evelyn
escaped this by realizing that nothing
mattered just got tired of pessimistic
cynicism time to get wired I'm
liberating nihilism if gender doesn't
matter what do any of these reservations
and feelings and Hang-Ups matter if
nothing matters neither social
expectations family conditioning polite
appearances then who cares who does what
as long as nobody's hurting anybody
including themselves
shouldn't avoiding that kind of pain be
the objective and if that is the
objective as many say it is why aren't
we building a world that is focused on
connection emotions fulfillment why are
we still obsessing over expectations and
vaguely defined parameters of success if
nothing else matters
what does matter is how you feel about
others and how you feel about yourself
in a world where everything is fluid and
flexible and maybe does or does not
actually exist your feelings are the
only things that you can guarantee to be
true
truly true
and if the structure of the world is
composed of our memories then the
goodness or evil of the world is
predicated on your past choices and
whether or not they are choices that you
are proud of or that you regret and the
thing about pride is that there is no
real qualification for that you can
choose to qualify your self-worth based
on external factors comparing yourself
to others or expectations imposed on you
but for all that nothing else matters
you and your feelings are the only
things you can be certain of
you can choose your own expectations and
you can choose to meet them or not
you can choose to see the hole in the
center of the bagel as emptiness
where you can choose to see it as
freedom
you can look at the googly eyes as a
ridiculous waste of time or you can
choose to understand that someone is
trying to lift the burden of the world
off your shoulders but you cannot choose
not to exist
and you cannot choose for others to
exist in a different way
for all that we choose we owe it to
everyone else to let them choose for
themselves
so be who you are be who you want to be
if you feel like you're too old for that
now or you've made too many choices
pulling you away from what you really
want you're wrong
it's never too early or too late to be
the best version of yourself
because the best version of yourself
isn't living in an alternate universe
they're already a part of you
waiting
for you to choose Joy
[Music]
foreign
thank you
[Music]
foreign